Moderation guide update (#1617)
matrix-org/matrix.org: content/docs/communities/moderation/_index.md

/op @yourMjolnirBot:example.com 100
```

> The bot really does need those privileges to be able to actually kick and ban

Reviewer: It would be nice to explain (the arguably harder) way of having it only Moderator (pl 51 for example) and allowing acl for pl51. That way the bot isn't an admin which always is annoying when you need to remove it later on in case a hs gets unreachable. If it is 51 and has acl perms it still works but admins are also able to remove it when needed. Mostly a quality of life change imho.

Reviewer: Obviously this makes it so you can't op people anymore fully with it.

Reviewer: (turns out I missed the next few sentences :)

How about documenting it behind a spoiler thingy as an advanced section?

Author: Documenting it behind a spoiler is a good idea! I'd like to land a first version quickly though, so I think it makes sense to go without it at first.

I'm also wondering if this should be documented on the Matrix.org "running your own community" documentation or if it should end up in mjolnir's own docs?

Reviewer: I feel like they could belong in either or both. A community does necessarily have their own homeserver. And equally a mjolnir mod might have a homeserver they want to moderate with mjolnir.

Reviewer: It somewhat only affects mjolnir and not communities in general I think. Like this setup is meant to benefit mjolnir. Maybe it is also helpful for other moderation bots but I feel like it is better in here.

> The bot really does need those privileges to be able to actually kick and ban
> people from the rooms it protects, or change other people's power level. Keep in
> mind that whoever has access to Mjolnir credentials effectively has powerlevel
> 100 in those rooms. In this configuration Mjolnir is de-facto the owner of your
> community rooms. Some more advanced configurations allow you to keep more
> privileges than mjolnir, but they are quite tedious to set-up. We will not cover
> in this documentation.

Reviewer 2: Some minor rewording tweaks to make it clearer that there is a common setup which works, but which has some considerations the user should think about. Then we point them to the material where they can learn more, and decide if they want a more advanced setup. I also simplified the language and sentence structure.

```suggestion
You should spend some time thinking about what privileges you want to give to your Mjolnir. A common setup is to give the Mjolnir user power level 100. This gives Mjolnir the permissions to kick and ban people from the rooms it protects. This has a couple of implications. First, anyone with access to the Mjolnir has power level 100 in the rooms it protects. Also, Mjolnir is the de-facto owner of those community rooms. For more advanced set-ups, read the [spec covering power levels](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mroompower_levels).
```

## Getting moderation reports

> By default, the moderation reports go to the reporter's homeserver

Reviewer: I fear it won't get updated again but maybe add a link to the msc element Web implements that sends them to mods instead?

> By default, the moderation reports go to the reporter's homeserver
> administrator. This is suboptimal for a variety of reasons. If the person
> running mjolnir and the person running the homeserver are the same, mjolnir can
> intercept some calls to display reports in its command room instead. Such
> reports look like below.

Reviewer 2: I don't agree that the default is suboptimal. It is a choice, and there are benefits and drawbacks to each approach.

```suggestion
By default, the moderation reports go to the reporter's homeserver
administrator. If you are the homeserver admin, you can choose to send the reports to the Mjolnir management room. Those reports look like this:
```

![](./mjolnir_report.png)

You can see the various details of the reported message, and handful of buttons
below the message you can click on. These buttons will instruct mjolnir to take
action, depending on which one you clicked.

To enable moderation reports in Mjolnir's command room, please follow Mjolnir's
[readable abuse reports documentation](https://github.com/matrix-org/mjolnir#enabling-readable-abuse-reports).

When someone is obviously not behaving properly, you want to take action to make
sure your community remains a nice place to hang out. To do so, you can do one
of the following.

## Enforcing moderation

### Redacting a specific message

If you have moderation reports enabled and click on the
{{ mjolnirbutton(text="🗍 Redact") }} button below it, mjolnir will redact this
message. Alternatively, if you don't have reports enabled or want to redact a
specific message from mjolnir, you can instruct mjolnir to do so by sending a
message in mjolnir's control room.

> To redact a specific message, you need to find its permalink. A permalink is a

Reviewer: Iirc the event id alone is enough. Not sure if that's easier or harder to get. It may depend on the client.

regular matrix.to link that you can obtain by hovering the message you want to
delete, and clicking on the `…`, then on `Share`.

![](./share_message.png)

> This will open a pop-up window from which you can copy the matrix.to permalink.

Author: Fixed in [774bd87](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix.org/pull/1617/commits/774bd8761340673270fd454fbe3178e6141f8c02). I don't think it's worth adding a sentence, since there's an example below with a matrix.to link :)

![](./copy_permalink.png)

Once you have the permalink, you can use it in mjolnir's redaction command

```
!mjolnir redact <event permalink> 
```

For example

```
!mjolnir redact https://matrix.to/#/!yOatELRSQXzfQMmxjH:matrix.org/$F76L2figPEC240TFaUkHoKPxxhJ3P54vP4hi14Sd8xw?via=matrix.org&via=t2bot.io
```

> You may wonder why you should use mjolnir if you can simply redact the message

Reviewer: Maybe it should be mentioned that redactions from mjolnir primarily are useful for mass redactions? As in redacting every message of a user. Since mjolnir is set up to not be rate limited it usually doesn't fail like a client would.

Author: Ah, I thought this was made obvious in the intro paragraph. Do you think I missed something? Would you tweak it to make it more visible?

users or servers on them. See the section [Creating ban lists](#creating-ban-lists)
below for more information on how to create them.

### Removing a server definitely

Matrix is a federated network. This means people can set up new servers
specifically to harm some communities. This allows them to create a virtually
infinite number of users, making it possible to raid other communities easily.

Fortunately, all these malicious users have one thing in common: they come from
the same homeserver. This means if you block the malicious homeserver entirely,
all the malicious users are going to be banned at once.

To do so, you can issue a variant of the command used to ban an individual user.
The command was

```
!mjolnir ban <list shortcode> <user|room|server> <glob> [reason]
```

As you probably guessed, you are not going to ban a user but a server this once.
For example, to ban the `maliciousdomain.tld` domain:

```
!mjolnir ban spam server maliciousdomain.tld
```

Mjolnir is going to add the domain to the `spam` ban list, and whenever someone
from that homeserver tries to join your community they are going to be banned.

> 

Reviewer: Missing is banning/disabling rooms for server admins. Or I guess in general the Synapse plugin is missing.

Author: I'm not sure I understand this suggestion :)

Mjolnir allows you to create several ban lists that it can later watch. Those
ban lists can also be watched by third parties if you make them public.

The command to issue in mjolnir's control room to create a list is the
following

```
!mjolnir list create <shortcode> <alias localpart>
```

- `shortcode` is a short name given to this list. It should be short and easy to
  type, since you are likely to type it a lot when banning users.
- `alias localpart` is the local part of the address mjolnir is going to create
  for this list. This is useful if you ever want to [share your ban list with
  other communities](#publishing-ban-lists).

For example, assuming the server mjolnir is deployed against is `example.com`,
the following command will create a ban list with the short code `spam` and the
address `#my-community-spam-ban-list:example.com`

```
!mjolnir list create spam my-community-spam-ban-list
```

You only need to create a ban list once, and can then add as many users and
servers as you want to that ban list. You can also create as many ban lists as
you want.

Communities often create two ban lists: one for spam, and one for code of
conduct infringements.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe a mention how to set a list as a default would also be useful.

Author: Fixed in 3ecb5eca

> 

Reviewer: Maybe a mention how to set a list as a default would also be useful.

Author: Fixed in 3ecb5eca

### Subscribing to ban lists

Ban lists are a clever mechanism that allows moderation teams to ban users for
different motives (e.g. one list for `spam` and one for `coc`). Such a
distinction can be useful when several communities want to collaborate together.

Not all communities will share a similar Code of Conduct, but a lot of them will
agree on what is spam. Being able to subscribe to another community's spam list
means your own community will be protected from spammers the other community has
already met, all while observing different code of conducts.

To subscribe to a public ban list, you need to retrieve the address of this
list. That list being technically nothing more than a Matrix room, its address
follows the usual `#room_name:server.tld` format.

Then to make mjolnir follow this list, you need to issue the following command
in its control room

```
!mjolnir watch <room alias/ID>
```

> For example to subscribe to the `#matrix-org-coc-bl:matrix.org` ban list

Reviewer: Well the tos list only applies the matrix-org homeserver terms of server. Not the overall matrix code of conduct. So the tos usually is not the one to use. Tos is meant to mainly apply to the homeserver while COC is a more general document applying to a greater part of matrix-org. (like the repos too iirc).

maintained by the Matrix Foundation, you would issue the following command

```
!mjolnir watch #matrix-org-coc-bl:matrix.org
```

> ### Publishing ban lists

Reviewer: This probably can moved into the creation of the lists. It feels out of place here and isn't long enough to warrant a full section imho

Author: Fixed in [bec4c28](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix.org/pull/1617/commits/bec4c28a9d72b1459bbe492e141a844e8873fd6d)[bec4c28](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix.org/pull/1617/commits/bec4c28a9d72b1459bbe492e141a844e8873fd6d)

From a technical perspective, a ban list is just a regular Matrix room filled
with moderation hidden messages, technically called events. As such, you can
give it a public address, and make it publicly accessible like you would for any
other room.

### Shadow-banning

Shadow-banning is a controversial technique that should be used a last resort to
deceive persistent spammers. It must not be used as part of routine moderation,
and the Matrix Foundation strongly discourages using it.

Shadow-banned users will try to send messages or various events to a homeserver,
which will return successful responses. The messages and various events will not
be propagated in the rooms. This corresponds to allowing the persistent spammer
to shout in the void, without realising it.

Shadow-banning is not part of the Matrix specification itself, which is why it
is implemented in the non-standard [Admin API of Synapse](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/administration/admin_api/index.html).

Homeserver administrators who want to resort to shadow banning can read about it

> [in Synape's documentation](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/admin_api/user_admin_api.html#controlling-whether-a-user-is-shadow-banned).

Reviewer 2: I'd maybe omit this section entirely?

Author: Fixed in [4d55d99](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix.org/pull/1617/commits/4d55d999d3bff150df01f55a68ddb3ce10afaaa9)
